[Music]
on my journey to film the lights I may
face temperatures as low as minus 30
so Petri wants to teach me how this Samy
can't in these extreme conditions got it
pretty tall so how many people could
sleep in a Levu of this I can sleep five
people inside this teepee style tained
is called on Levu for over a thousand
years this simple shelter has helped the
Sami survive in the Arctic it was just
two steaks it was a bit wobbly her quite
wobbling and the third one it's a little
bit wobbly but with every additional
stick you see you get this really stable
stable structure there's more to add the
Sami leave lava pools at waypoints
across the tundra this is great so all
I'll need to carry with me on my journey
it's a canvas covering it's amazing how
quickly the whole lava heats up my
trousers are getting nice and dry here
it might be approaching minus 20 outside
but thanks to the fire I'm feeling very
cozy but as I'm getting comfortable
Petri introduces me to slightly
unsettling sami snack what do you think
I'd make what pancakes blood pancake
whose reindeer blood yeah is your blood
in the flask yes flask of Bloods I'm
glad that I didn't pick this up and say
no I nice mug of coffee and it's
reindeer blood it might seem odd to us
but over thousands of years the Sami
have learnt to use every part of a
reindeer the value and respect these
animals so much nothing is wasted
here up thank you hmm I think it was
expecting the flavor to be much much
stronger but it's very mild
what kind of good winter food yeah I
like that a lot
the only thing that's putting me off is
reindeer walking about outside as I'm
eating a reindeer blood pancake remember
reindeer they are not like a Bates they
are here in the nature where they
belongs they are free and happy what
about the pigs and cows they stay inside
all day life there is no room to her
moving radius here the forest where it
belongs
the Sami reindeer are a vital source of
nutrients over the harsh winter months
that evening Petry and his family invite
me to a traditional welcome dinner I
have a strong suspicion about what will
be on the menu thank you Petra's wife QC
and his two sons Pierre - and pena me
addressed in the Sammy outfits that
their family have worn for generations
and yes we're eating reindeer this time
it's salted and served with potatoes a
traditional festive meal this is very
nice please yeah do you think either of
the boys will be reindeer herders when
they grow up yes maybe that's good they
can make their own choice when they grow
up but this is that kind of job is you
must come in your heart because it's
hard job everyday job in the winter and
you know you'll never be a millionaire
we see I suppose that's part of living
in a beautiful part of the world why
would you live in somewhere that is
quite so difficult if you didn't love it
be boring us did you never want to leave
big cities and I say no too many people
for me this is arguably one of the best
places in the world to see Northern
Lights so the boys have grown up with
that just a part of their life did did
you ever serve it was there ever a point
that you explained what they wear or did
you kind of tell them that the folklore
of of the Northern Lights actually the
Sami people have traditionally lots of
stories about the Northern Lights
for example they think that they are
caused by a Firefox or or with a tale of
it when it's running on the top of the
hills and it's wiping the skies
it's great to learn more about Sami
culture a way of life that is over four
thousand years old
[Music]
[Applause]